Salmon and Sea Trout fishing in Scotland

Need more context to what "Netting effort" is if we are going to try to build conclusions, or a ML model, on its data.



ML notes:

For our region model we need to make sure Orkney is included as it is a possibility, however there are only 
three occurrences we also need to make sure that it is a very small weight on expected outcomes of the model, if the 
weight is too heavy then we can remove it if its omission will provide a substantial enough improvement to our model accuracy

For our method model, we have a similar situation with released catches as there are only 38 total occurrences out of 
our 25,000 total recorded catches where the catch was then released back into the water. There is also a bias in region this occurs 
as well as a bias towards the catch method which is then released. Again, we should only omit this outcome if there is a significant 
improvement in our model's accuracy 

We can build two distinct Machine Learning models each on categorical variables, region and method.
- We would likely use an SGD model due to our sample size of less than 100k samples, and all data is clearly labeled
- We can also look at kernel approximation to see if it would produce better results on our sample size


Need to better understand our catching methods before we make an ML model for it i.e:
- What region is most commonly associated with catching method.
- What fish is most commonly associated with catching method.
- What are the netting effort trends of each catching method.
- Totals for each netting method.
- Average weight, number, netting effort, etc for each catching method.
- Is there a time discrepancy? Do certain months or years align with specific methods?

We have some good regional understandings so far, can likely build that model soon, however we definitely need a better understanding of
catch method before we build an ML model for that. 






Data Viz notes:

We want to continue grouping our data to find insights based on method and region, as well as try to find some more
interesting results such as the massive decrease in fish caught over the years found through our time-series analysis

We have pie charts, bar graphs, and lineplots so far but we could also try to find a variable or set of variables that 
would allow us to showcase other data visualization methods to have a more robust and all-encompassing project.

Also, would like to take a look at Netting Effort by fish 
- Maybe as another pie chart to see how each fish type compares to total netting effort 
- Would likely need to use the weight columns to define average netting effort by fish weight
- Can calculate the proportion of fish to average netting effort to try to get a better effort of the netting effort per fish

Something we could check for netting effort is taking the total weight for each fish, as well as the proportion of weights of all fish,
and see if this can be used to calculate a netting effort proportion as it very likely that "more weight" = "more effort"

**Do some quick insights on our dropped region of "Orkney" and its minimal amount of data.**


Should probably take a look at fish weight trends by region as well

Originally considered a pie chart, but now I'm thinking a barplot could be better for taking a look at total catching method
since there is such a heavy lean towards the two retained outcomes over the two released outcomes 

(copy) Need to better understand our catching methods before we make an ML model for it i.e:
- What region is most commonly associated with catching method.
- What fish is most commonly associated with catching method.
- What are the netting effort trends of each catching method.
- Totals for each netting method.
- Average weight, number, netting effort, etc for each catching method.
- Is there a time discrepancy? Do certain months or years align with specific methods?

We have some good regional understandings so far, can likely build that model soon, however we definitely need a better understanding of
catch method before we build an ML model for that. (end copy)





Dataset notes:

Wild Salmon and Trout seem to be predominately caught in the North East and East regions, with a sharp dropoff in the last 
25 years (since 1998) that more drastically affected the East region.

Finnock was relatively uncaught or unrecorded until about 20 years ago (2003). And has lately spiked in Moray Firth. 

Farmed Salmon mainly occurs in the Northwest and West coast regions. Least likely to occur in the East and North East.

Netting Effort is highest in North East followed by Solway, then Moray Firth and North regions. Even though the East region 
has a high level of wild fish (both salmon and trout) caught the overall netting effort is relatively low as it is the second lowest total netting effort
recorded. 

The only regions with a significant released method are Solway (Fixed Engine: Released) and the East region (Net and Coble: Released)

Outer Hebrides has a very low amount of total catches, need to be wary of this when looking at insights in data

The dominant catching method in most regions is Fixed Engine: Retained the only regions that differ are Outer Hebrides and the East, where the
main catching method is Net and Coble: Retained. 

All fishiing has been steadily declining since the mid-1970s except for a few spikes.

The East region had by far the most wild fish caught until 1990 when it completely drops to well-below other regions, might be good to try and 
research why there has been such a steep drop in that region specifically

Farmed fish has either dropped off recently after only starting in the late 1980's/early 1990's or the recent data for farmed fish is not 
included in the dataset.
- Could be good to research scottish salmon farming regulations
- Regions with a high level of farmed fish seem to also have a higher Netting Effort; could be good to look into since East region's 
netting effort was so low in comparison to the amount of wild fish caught.








Other project notes:

Now that we have proportional data, as well as sums and other insightful results we can start to build an economic profile of fishing in Scotland.

We can also start looking at ML model since we some baseline metrics that we can use for checking accuracy, in addition it may be hard but we could
try to build a regression model on {fish} number and/or weight. Also, a classification model for fish types could be useful since we have data that could
build an inferential model.






Notes for Conclusions:

***ML Model - (Null)


***Data - 

Proportions of fish:

Wild Multi-sea Winter Salmon: about 0.29
Wild One-sea Winter Salmon: about 0.43
Sea Trout: about 0.28

Other: 0.00026 (can be considered insignificant compared to rest)

We can already pull interesting data for each fish type as well as region, catch method, and netting effort. We also have time-series data to show 
how the industry has changed over time.

Do some quick insights on our dropped region of "Orkney" and its minimal amount of data.
